Sync: synchronizing objects
===========================

Introduction
------------

Obviel Sync is a JavaScript library that keeps track of client-side
objects and can keep them in sync with a backend and a UI. It supports
different kinds of backends: HTTP (Rest_), localstorage, and
websockets, and abstracts the application away from the particular
backend used.

We can divide a dynamic web application in a frontend and backend. The
frontend takes care of the UI the user sees in the browser. It runs on
the client; in the web browser. The UI is constructed from *models*
which are JavaScript objects on the client -- the *Ob* in Obviel. How
are these models maintained?

The simplest case is a web application that maintains its models
itself and that's it. The models disappear as soon as the web
application is closed. The only software that touches the models is
the web application itself and the only storage is main memory. Simple
single-player games on the web are often like this, though often there
is an exception to this when they need to save and share high scores.

In many cases the information represented by an application's models
needs to persist even when the web application is not active. A
todo-list application, for instance, needs to have its todos stored so
when you close the application and open it again later, the todos are
there again.

In many applications, at least some information needs to be shared
between different users. Forum software is like this, for example, as
forum messages need to be visible to multiple users. Another case we
already mentioned is sharing high-score information for a web game.

For many applications therefore a backend is needed for *storage* or
*persistence*. This is usually the only responsibility of the backend;
other responsibilities include coordinating information between
different users, controlling access to information, deriving
information, receiving new information from external sources, and
making sure the data stored is consistent.

When frontend models change this can affect the backend. For instance,
when a todo item is added to the todo list, the backend is informed of
this. Similarly when a todo item is changed, the backend needs to be
informed about the update.

The direction can also be reversed: the web application models need to
be updated when the state of the backend changes. For example, when
you post an item on a forum, the server backend is informed about it,
and the backend then informs other people who may be viewing the forum
about the new item as well. So, there is a bi-directional exchange of
information between frontend and backend:

* The backend needs to be informed about changes to the object
  structure in the frontend (typically triggered by the UI).

* The frontend needs to be informed about changes done to the object
  structure on the server (which often results in a UI update).

You can write manual code to keep frontend models in sync with a
backend. For HTTP Obviel core offers some facilities to help you with
this -- you can render a URL directly, causing the object to be loaded
from the server and (re)rendered. But even with that convenience you
need to write quite a bit of custom code.

Obviel Sync helps with this. It is a declarative system that lets you
state how your frontend models relate to a backend. If you use a
special way to maintain your frontend models, Obviel Sync takes care
of informing the backend.

Since Obviel Sync keeps track of changes to frontend models, it can
not only be used to update the backend, but to keep the UI up to date
as well - when a frontend model is changed, the UI can be updated
automatically.

Keeping Track of Objects
------------------------

Obviel Sync needs to keep track of when frontend objects have been
changed, new ones are created, and existing ones removed. We can then
use this information to update the backend as well as the UI.

Obviel Sync uses a special *session* object to keep track of changes,
additions and removals. You then *commit* the session when you want
Obviel Sync to take action. This is also know as the `Unit of Work
pattern`_.

.. _`Unit of Work pattern`: http://martinfowler.com/eaaCatalog/unitOfWork.html

In order to establish a session, you first need a connection::

  var conn = new obviel.sync.Connection();

We'll see what you can do with the connections later.

Now you can create a session::

  var session = conn.session();

The connection keeps track of the current session in use.

Now let's imagine you have an object ``obj`` and that you have changed
it by modifying a property ``foo`` on it::

  obj.foo = "This is a new value";

To inform Obviel Sync that the property ``foo`` has changed on
``obj``, use ``update``::

  session.update(obj, 'foo');

Now let's consider collections of objects. A collection of objects is
represented as an array in JavaScript. It must always be part of an
object; we call this object the *container object*. A container object
is just an ordinary JavaScript object that can contain one or more
items. Here is a container object that has a collection property
``items``::

  var container = { 
    iface: 'mycontainer',
    items: []
  }

We now add an item to the ``items`` collection::

  var item = {iface: 'item', value: 'A'];

  container.items.push(item);

Here's how to tell the session what we've done::
 
  session.add(container, 'items', item);

Similarly we can remove an object from a collection. Obviel Sync has
a special helper function that lets you do this easily::

  obviel.sync.removeFromArray(container.items, item);

Here's how we tell the session what we've done::

  session.remove(container, 'items', item);

Automatically Keep Track of Changes
-----------------------------------

It can be a bit cumbersome to have to tell the session separately what
changes we made to objects. The session provides a special ``mutator`` object
that makes this easier. We can wrap it around the object we want
to mutate::

  var m = session.mutator(obj);

You can also create the mutator directly from the connection; this will
create a hidden session for you automatically::

  var m = conn.mutator(obj);

We now use the mutator to change ``obj``::

  m.set('foo', 'This is a new value');

This sets the property ``foo`` *and* informs the session about it
(``session.update(obj, 'foo')``) all at the same time.

We can also modify collections in container objects. First let's wrap
the container object in a mutator::

  var m = session.mutator(container);

Now we can get to the ``items`` collection and push an item into it::

  m.get('items').push(item);

This adds the item to the array ``items`` and tells the session about
it (``session.add(container, 'items', item)``).

We can also use this to remove items from an array and inform the
session about it::

  m.get('items').remove(item);

Connections
-----------

In order to communicate with a backend, Obviel Sync needs a connection.

Obviel Sync at present provides three kinds of connection:

* ``obviel.sync.HttpConnection`` - communicate with a (RESTful) HTTP backend
  that serves up JSON objects.

* ``obviel.sync.LocalStorageConnection`` - store data in a local
  storage backend on the browser. XXX somewhat broken

* ``obviel.sync.SocketIoConnection`` - communicate with a websocket backend 
  using Socket.io. XXX immature

To set up a connection you need to create it::

  conn = new obviel.sync.HttpConnection();

You then need to initialize it with an object using ``init()``.
``conn.init`` takes an object argument -- it specifies the root object
of the frontend that you want to keep in sync with the backend. Obviel
will load initial content for the application from the connection.
``init`` returns a jQuery deferred that is completed when this loading
is done.

The typical pattern of loading up a connection looks like this::

  conn.init(root).done(function() {
     $('#app').render(root);
  });

I.e. initialize ``root`` from the connection, and then render it somewhere
into the DOM tree.

Declarations
------------

Now Obviel Sync needs to be told when and how to communicate with the
connection. You can do this by declaring this on the connection.  You
need to do this before you call ``init()`` on the connection.

You can declare per ``iface`` what to do when the frontend is
modified, and also what to do when the backend reports an object has
been modified.

When you initialize an object using ``init()``, the backend is asked
to provide the contents of this object; this is called a ``refresh``
action. We need to tell Obviel Sync to do what to do when we ask the
frontend to refresh the ``root`` object::

  conn.frontendRefresh('root', Http({
     method: 'GET',
     url: 'http://example.com/refreshRoot',
     response: obviel.sync.backendUpdate
  }));

Here we tell Obviel Sync that when a ``refresh`` is requested for
``root``, we want to issue a GET HTTP request to the server, using URL
``http://example.com/refreshRoot``, and to take the resulting JSON
object as an update from the backend, so pass it to ``backendUpdate``.

So now we need to teach Obviel Sync to do when a ``backendUpdate`` for
a ``root`` object comes in. What we want to do is to update that object
with the JSON content we received from the server::
 
  conn.backendUpdate('root', obviel.sync.updateObject);

That takes care of basic communication from backend to frontend; we
can now initialize an object and get its content from the backend. Now
the other way around: when we change an object on the frontend, we
want to inform the backend::

  conn.frontendUpdate('root', Http({
    method: 'POST',
    url: 'http://example.com/updateRoot'
  }));

Here we tell Obviel Sync that when an object is updated in the
frontend, we want to send a HTTP POST to the URL
``http://example.com/updateRoot``.

